1/17

Melody
- pitch (one thing)
- interval (conjunct or disjunct, e.g. 1, 4)
- range (span of pitches)
- scale (e.g. 1234567)
(melody: succession of pitches we perceive as an organizable whole)

Time
- beat : constant, background, "grid"
- rhythm : temporal groups that occur around the beat
           the movement of music in time.
- meter (duple, triple)
- tempo : speed of the beat

Harmony
- result of two pitches sounding simultanously
  consonant (pleasent)
  dissonant

Western Harmony
MODAL
TONAL
ATONAL

Texure: the interaction of musical lines/voices
One voice: monophony
More than one voice:
  homophony
    (one important voice "based on harmony")
    Homorhythmic
    Melody + accompaniment
  polyphony
    (More than one important voice
     "based on conterpoint")
    Imitative (same, similar tone)
    Non-imitative

1/22

* Music Elements
Dynamics
  Indicates the loudness or softness, or volume, of a sound.

  Soft (pianissimo, pp, very quite)
  Medium (mezzo piano, mp)
  Loud (forte, f)

  get louder: Crescendo
  get softer: Decrescendo

Instrumentation
  Organology: the study of musical instruments
  Strings, woodwinds, brass, percussion(pitched / unpitched)

  timbre: the character or quality of a musical sound or voice as distinct from its pitch and intensity.

Genre
  What type of music is this?
  Suggests the overall character of work as well as its function.
  e.g. opera, symphony, string quartet, piano sonata, song.

Style
  A collection of traits that makes a particular set of musical works distinctive or unique.
    historically, regionally, etc.
    To what tradition does this music belong?
  May also be used to describe a particular composer's manner of expression.

1/27

* Medieval culture

Dark ages
Middle ages
Early music
Pre-enlightenment

In 800, development of notations

Balance between legacy of antiquity and innovation
Construction of many Cathedrals.

What is chant?
An intonation or recitation typically sung or shouted in unison, typically part of a ritual.
Chanting occurs and is common in many cultures.

The official monophonic unison chant of the Christian Liturgies. The term is used to prefer particularly to the chant repertories with Latin text.

Text setting in planchant
Syllabic: one note (pitch) set to each syllable of text
Neumatic: small groups of roughly 5-6 notes (pitches) sung to a syllable of text
Melismatic: many notes set to one syllable of text.

Characteristics of plainchant
Texture: monophonic
Rhythm: free
Instrumentation: vocal

"Neumes"

1/29

(Playlist 12)

Catholic mass
  A reenactment of the sacrifice of Christ
  Most solemn ritual of the Catholic Church
  Collection of prayers that makes up the mass = the liturgy

Catholic liturgy
  Ordinary: texts that remain the same in every Mass
  Proper: texts that vary from day to day throughout the church year

Organum: a musical elaboration of planchant
  Def: a type of medieval homophony or polyphony with one sustained part of note and other movable parts

The reformation: three streams
  Growing sense that the church elite
  Middle class, educated Euros wanted to manage their own spiritual life more than Church
  Kings and Princes resented the Church's control over hand, property and wealth.

Three protestant reformation
  Lutheran
    Church corruption / hierachy. Papal authority.
	Purgatory & indulgences
	Separation of Church & State
	Sacraments (how many & the nature of the host)
	Language of Bible, music
  Calvin
    Agrees with Luther on: Church corruption, purgatory, language, no transubstantiation.
	Disgree: means of salvation (predestination), church & state (christianize the government)
  Anglican

Council of trent


2/3

Printing press
  Reduces labor and cost of printing
  Allows ideas to travel, fosters reformation
  How does it affect music?
    Allows more people to have access
	Creates a music market
	fosters music literacy.
	Takes away a space for artistic illustration <

**
  Hildegard, Allelua -> Plainchant
  Josquin, Ave Maria -> Motet
  Palestrine, Pope ... -> Gloria

having in common?
  sacred, Latin

Secular?

Troubadour & trouvere song
  Most significant body of vernacular song in the Middle Ages.
  Troubadours - S France; Trouveres - N France
  Begain in S in 12th cent. and spread N
  Cultivated in courts and cities under aristocratic sponsorship
  Subjects - mostly courtly love, though some on political, moral, litrary topics.

Analyzing songs: TMRC
  Text: subject of the songs
  Music: musical features
  how do the words and music *Relate*
  Context: Who would perform the music and in what setting?

The mardrigal
  Aristocratic form of poetry and music, from Italy, hitting England and France
  4-6 voices, for amateurs
  emotional expressions of weeping, sighing, trembing, dying
  word-painting
  unsatisfied desire

The chanson
  During Francis (1515 - 1547), composers in France developed new type of chanson.
  Light, fast, strongly rhythmic song for four voices.
  Pleasant, amorous situations, though more serious texts were occasioally chosen.
  In simple forms, text set syllabically, duple meter.
  Amateurs.
  Word-painting.


2/5

Hildegard, Allelua -> Plainchant
Josquin, Ave Maria -> Motet
Palestrine, Pope ... -> Gloria
Anonymous -> Round
Farmer -> Madrigal

Round
  A genre
  voices/instruments enter in succession with same melody
  Example: Row, row, row your boat

**
  Sumer is icumen in
  Genre: perpetual round

English Madrigal
  English composers
  During Elizabeth I (1558-1603)
  Humor is a primary theme, "fa la la"

**
  John Farmer
  Fair Phyllis

Lute song
  Accompanied song (voices + lute)

John Dowland
  most prolific composer for lute and ? songs


2/10

Quiz: Playlist 12 - 15

Style: Monody
Genre: Opera
Composers: Caccini, Monetverdi, Peri, Perceil
Playlist: 16
Terms: Aria, Recitative, Basso Continuo, Figured Bass

Baroque 1600-1750
  Term Baroque is applied in retrospect

The second Practice
The new music
Dramma per musica
General term: "Monody"

"Monody"
  It is a style (not a texture or genre)
  A solo vocal style distinguished by a signle melodic line and instrumental accompniment.
  Vocally elaborate - melismatic, virtuosic
  Instrumental accompaniment usually basso continuo
  Applied to Italian song of the early 17th century: to genres such as solo madrigals, arias, recitatives
  Could stand alone as independent songs or be put together into a larger work (genra: opera)

"Basso continuo"
  An accompaniment comprised of a choradal instrument and a melody instrument

Harpsichord
  Predecessor of the piano
  Chords are plucked, instead of hit with a hammer

Consequences of the "new" monodic style, ca. 1600
  Created demand for professional, highly trained and expressive signers and other musicians
  Music now "consumed" by wealthy patrons primarily through listening (rather than prticipation)
  Spread to all types of music
  It makes music drama possible

The second practice
  Work regarded as revoltionary transitional figure.
  Contributed to the new basso contino accompaniment menodic style. "Second Practice".
  Composed 9 books of madrigals including many solo madrigals

Monteverdi's Defense
  It is the goal of Monteverdi to make the words the mistress of the harmony and not its servant

Peri's recitative style

The "invention" of opera
  Opera
    Union of versified play, drama, music
	Continuous or near-continuous singing
	Staged, with scenery, customs..
  Designed to imitate "classical" Greek tragedy
  2 types of pieces:
    Speech-like, free rhythm
	emotion-painting, song-like - regular rhythm
  
English opera
  Masque popular in Early 17th-century England
    vocal music + instrumental music + poetry + dance
	Performed in the homes of nobility

Henry Purcell
 
Purcell's dido & aeneas 1689
  England's oldest opera
  Adapted from part of Virgil's Aeneid
  First performed at the London girls' school where he taught.
  exceptional for this period
